RP Cloud Overview and Security doc (#1504)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/deploy/deployment-option/cloud/cloud-overview.mdx

---
title: Redpanda Cloud Overview
---

<head>
    <meta name="title" content="Redpanda Cloud Overview | Redpanda Docs"/>
    <meta name="description" content="Redpanda Cloud employs a control plane
    and data plane architecture that ensures no human has direct access to Redpanda
    brokers or customer data."/>
</head>

> Redpanda Cloud offers fully managed and dedicated Redpanda clusters as a service,

Reviewer: This sentence is confusing to me. It makes "Fully Managed" and Dedicated sound like different things? When Both Dedicated and BYOC are _fully managed_.

Reviewer 2: +1, but I think the challenge here is our use of "Dedicated" (with a capital D) for our product offering. In this sentence, I think what we mean is dedicated (with a small d), which sounds correct to me -- but agree that it confuses with the capital D Dedicated Product.

> which you can deploy in your cloud account or in the Redpanda Cloud, either in AWS

Reviewer: I think we can remove 'the'

or GCP. Redpanda Cloud continuously monitors and maintains your Redpanda clusters
along with the underlying Redpanda Cloud infrastructure to meet strict performance,
availability, reliability, and security requirements. These clusters are also
deployed with an integrated and dedicated Redpanda Console and, optionally, with
a fully managed Kafka Connect and Connectors cluster as well.

> Redpanda Cloud supports Dedicated clusters and Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC) clusters,

Reviewer: I would add "running in Redpanda Cloud Account" aafter 'Dedicated Clusters'

> which are clusters running in your cloud account.

Reviewer: "which run in the customer's cloud account"

Author: Assuming that users/ customers are the primary audience, so in this instance, I think "your" works.

## Cloud Architecture

Redpanda Cloud employs a control plane and data plane architecture. The control
plane configures and maintains Redpanda Cloud clusters, which are self-contained
and independent of the control plane, and remain available even if the network

> connection to the data plane is lost.

Reviewer 3: network connection to the **control plane** is lost

Reviewer: Do we want to mention that the control plane does this using an Agent?

### Control plane

> The control plane is a separate entity that resides above and enforces rules

Reviewer 3: what do we mean with resides "above"?

Reviewer: Maybe we can use the word separately

in the data plane. The control plane is where a good deal of your Redpanda
cluster management, operations, and maintenance takes place. While Redpanda
Cloud clusters are configured and maintained in the control plane, they are
self-contained and remain available even if your network connection to the
control plane is lost.

### Data plane

> The data plane is where your data resides in Redpanda Cloud; it is

Reviewer: Do we want to say "data resides" or "Redpanda cluster"

> self-contained and managed by an agent that receives instructions from the

Reviewer 3: receives `cluster specifications` from the the control plane. 

We have to be a bit careful with the wording here because people get anxious when we say the agent receives commands or instructions. Technically, it receives a Redpanda Cloud cluster specification.

control plane. Redpanda Cloud clusters are interchangeably referred to as
data planes. All network connections into the data plane take place through
either a public endpoint or a Redpanda Cloud [VPC peering network connection](../vpc-peering).

### Agent

The Redpanda Cloud agent, also known as the data plane agent, provisions,
configures, and maintains all the resources in the Redpanda Cloud cluster, from
the network all the way up to the Redpanda cluster and Connectors infrastructure.

> Agent resources include cloud infrastructure, Kubernetes, and data plane software

Reviewer 3: Data plane resources include...

artifacts.

Agents can be bootstrapped in two different ways: automatically by a machine
or manually by a human. The human-driven agent bootstrap is designed for
the Redpanda Cloud BYOC deployment type. After the agent is up and running,

> it connects to the control plane and starts dequeuing and running instructions

Reviewer 3: dequeuing and `applying cluster specifications` that provision, configure, and ...

to provision, configure, and maintain Redpanda Cloud clusters.

The agent is in constant communication with the Redpanda Cloud control plane,

> receiving and running commands and exchanging metadata. Agents are authenticated

Reviewer 3: receiving and applying cluster specifications and exchanging cluster metadata. Agents are...

> and authorized through opaque and ephemeral tokens, and have dedicated command

Reviewer 3: , and have dedicated job queues

only one agent manages each network resource at a time.

The following diagram identifies the resources, operations, and connections
that exist in and between the Redpanda Cloud control plane and data plane.

![Redpanda Cloud Security Architecture](../../../../static/img/control-plane.png)

## Ways to provision clusters

Redpanda offers two ways to provision clusters in the cloud:
* [Dedicated Cloud](../create-dedicated-cloud-cluster-aws)
* Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC) ([AWS](../create-byoc-cluster-aws) or [GCP](../create-byoc-cluster-gcp))

Both methods offer the following features:
* Single-zone or multi-zone availability
    * A single-zone cluster is deployed in one availability zone. If that
      availability zone fails, the cluster becomes unavailable.
    * A multi-zone cluster is deployed across three availability zones, which
      provides higher resiliency in the event of a failure in one of the zones.
* Private networking using VPC peering
* Ability to export metrics to a 3rd-party monitoring system
* [Managed connectors](../managed-connectors)
* Unlimited retention with Tiered Storage

### Dedicated cloud

> With the Dedicated Cloud, you host your data in Redpanda’s Virtual Private Cloud

Reviewer 3: Redpanda Cloud's own environment

Reviewer 3: I changed my mind, I guess it is OK to say VPC

(VPC), and Redpanda handles provisioning, operations, and maintenance. Redpanda
also performs automatic backups to S3 (for AWS) or GCS (for GCP).

Dedicated clusters are single-tenant deployments launched from the Redpanda

> control plane. The Redpanda cluster is created in Redpanda’s VPC, and the

Reviewer 3: Redpanda Cloud's own environment

endpoints are exposed so you can produce or consume events.

### BYOC

When you choose BYOC, you deploy Redpanda in your own VPC, so that all data is

> contained in your own environment. There is no outbound connection from your VPC

Reviewer 3: There are no *inbound* connections made from the control plane to the data plane, which provides...

to the Redpanda VPC in the control or data path, which provides an additional
layer of security and isolation.

Redpanda handles provisioning, monitoring, and upgrades. You can choose AWS or
GCP as your cloud provider.

Setting up a BYOC cluster is initiated from the Redpanda control plane. This is
a two-step process:

> 1. You bootstrap a Virtual Machine (VM) in your VPC. This VM spins up the agent

Reviewer 3: Worth mentioning this is done with RPK.

Author: what is the specific rpk command (and options) for step 1 here @c4milo ?

   and the required infrastructure.

> 2. The agent communicates with the control plane to pull the control commands.

Reviewer 3: to pull the cluster specs.

---
title: Redpanda Cloud Overview
---

<head>
    <meta name="title" content="Redpanda Cloud Overview | Redpanda Docs"/>
    <meta name="description" content="Redpanda Cloud employs a control plane
    and data plane architecture that ensures no human has direct access to Redpanda
    brokers or customer data."/>
</head>

> Redpanda Cloud offers dedicated Redpanda clusters as a service that you can

Reviewer 4: This intro sentence is a little confusing about how dedicated clusters can be BYOC. How about just saying something like: "You can deploy Redpanda clusters in your own cloud account or in Redpanda Cloud, using either AWS or GCP."

> deploy in your cloud account or in Redpanda Cloud, using either in AWS or GCP.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
deploy in your cloud account or in Redpanda Cloud, using either AWS or GCP.
```

Redpanda Cloud continuously monitors and maintains your Redpanda clusters along
with the underlying Redpanda Cloud infrastructure to meet strict performance,
availability, reliability, and security requirements. These clusters are also
deployed with an integrated and dedicated Redpanda Console and, optionally, with

> a fully managed Kafka Connect and Connectors cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a fully managed Kafka Connect and connectors cluster.
```

> Redpanda Cloud supports Dedicated clusters running in a Redpanda Cloud account and

Reviewer 4: Actually, I suggest reworking this entire intro, since it's important. This last line could be the first line, since they're similar, but the last one is better. One possibility: "Redpanda supports Dedicated Cloud, with clusters running in Redpanda Cloud, and also Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC), with clusters running in your private cloud." Also, I believe we only capitalize Dedicated Cloud; i.e., not Dedicated clusters. For clarity, suggest trying to use the word "dedicated" only with Dedicated Cloud. Use some synonym for things like dedicated clusters and dedicated console.

Author: PM already corrected this first line--advised that I use "dedicated".

Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC) clusters, which are clusters running in your cloud
account.

## Cloud Architecture

> Redpanda Cloud employs a control plane and data plane architecture. The control

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Redpanda Cloud uses a control plane and data plane architecture. The control
```

> plane configures and maintains Redpanda Cloud clusters (using [agents](../cloud-overview#agent)), which are self-contained
> and independent of the control plane, and remain available even if the network
> connection to the control plane is lost.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
plane configures and maintains Redpanda Cloud clusters using [agents](../cloud-overview#agent), which are self-contained
and independent of the control plane. Agents remain available even if the network
connection to the control plane is lost.
```

### Control plane

> The control plane is a separate entity that is separate from and enforces rules

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The control plane is a separate entity that enforces rules
```

in the data plane. The control plane is where a good deal of your Redpanda
cluster management, operations, and maintenance takes place. While Redpanda
Cloud clusters are configured and maintained in the control plane, they are
self-contained and remain available even if the network connection to the

> control plane is lost.

Reviewer 4: Is this the same thing you're saying above? Do agents remain available even if the network connection to the control plane is lost, or do clusters remain available even if the network connection to the control plane is lost? If the latter, then I suggest removing this same bit from the paragraph above.

### Data plane

The data plane is where your Redpanda cluster resides in Redpanda Cloud; it is
self-contained and managed by an agent that receives cluster specifications from the
control plane. Redpanda Cloud clusters are interchangeably referred to as
data planes. All network connections into the data plane take place through

> either a public endpoint or a Redpanda Cloud [VPC peering network connection](../vpc-peering).

Reviewer 4: My personal preference, but I find this VPC link and the agent link above more distracting than helpful. I think intros should be super clean and simple.

Author: Removed the agents link, as it is on the same page; kept the VPC peering link because it goes to a different page.

### Agent

The Redpanda Cloud agent, also known as the data plane agent, provisions,
configures, and maintains all the resources in the Redpanda Cloud cluster, from

> the network all the way up to the Redpanda cluster and Connectors infrastructure.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the network all the way up to the Redpanda cluster and connectors infrastructure.
```

Data plane resources include cloud infrastructure, Kubernetes, and data plane software
artifacts.

Agents can be bootstrapped in two different ways: automatically by a machine
or manually by a human. The human-driven agent bootstrap is designed for
the Redpanda Cloud BYOC deployment type. After the agent is up and running,
it connects to the control plane and starts dequeuing and applying cluster
specifications that provision, configure, and maintain Redpanda Cloud clusters.

The agent is in constant communication with the Redpanda Cloud control plane,
receiving and applying cluster specifications and exchanging cluster metadata.
Agents are authenticated and authorized through opaque and ephemeral tokens, and
have dedicated job queues in the control plane. In BYOC, you can provision,

> configure, and maintain agents using rpk.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
configure, and maintain agents using `rpk`.
```

Redpanda Cloud agents also manage Redpanda Cloud VPC peering networks. However,
only one agent manages each network resource at a time.

The following diagram identifies the resources, operations, and connections
that exist in and between the Redpanda Cloud control plane and data plane.

> ![Redpanda Cloud Security Architecture](../../../../static/img/control-plane.png)

Reviewer 4: Some of the text in the png is so small it's unreadable. Maybe some of the text could be removed from the image and explained in the doc instead. It'd be good if at least the text in the png outside the images (like Control plane and Data plane) could be enlarged.

Author: My understanding is that with Antora, users will be able to click on the image and see it rendered much larger, so once we migrate, that should resolve this issue.

## Ways to provision clusters

Redpanda offers two ways to provision clusters in the cloud:
* [Dedicated Cloud](../create-dedicated-cloud-cluster-aws)

> * Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC) ([AWS](../create-byoc-cluster-aws) or [GCP](../create-byoc-cluster-gcp))

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC): [AWS](../create-byoc-cluster-aws) or [GCP](../create-byoc-cluster-gcp)
```

Both methods offer the following features:
* Single-zone or multi-zone availability
    * A single-zone cluster is deployed in one availability zone. If that
      availability zone fails, the cluster becomes unavailable.
    * A multi-zone cluster is deployed across three availability zones, which
      provides higher resiliency in the event of a failure in one of the zones.
* Private networking using VPC peering
* Ability to export metrics to a 3rd-party monitoring system
* [Managed connectors](../managed-connectors)
* Unlimited retention with Tiered Storage

> ### Dedicated cloud

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Dedicated Cloud
```

> With the Dedicated Cloud, you host your data in Redpanda’s Virtual Private Cloud

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With Dedicated Cloud, you host your data in Redpanda’s Virtual Private Cloud
```

(VPC), and Redpanda handles provisioning, operations, and maintenance. Redpanda
also performs automatic backups to S3 (for AWS) or GCS (for GCP).

Dedicated clusters are single-tenant deployments launched from the Redpanda
control plane. The Redpanda cluster is created in Redpanda’s VPC, and the
endpoints are exposed so you can produce or consume events.

### BYOC

> When you choose BYOC, you deploy Redpanda in your own VPC, so that all data is
> contained in your own environment. There are no inbound connections from the
> control plane to the data plane; this provides an additional layer of security
> and isolation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With BYOC, you deploy Redpanda in your own VPC, so that all data is
contained in your own environment. There are no inbound connections from the
control plane to the data plane. This provides an additional layer of security
and isolation.
```

Redpanda handles provisioning, monitoring, and upgrades. You can choose AWS or
GCP as your cloud provider.

Setting up a BYOC cluster is initiated from the Redpanda control plane. This is

> a two-step process performed using rpk:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a two-step process performed using `rpk`:
```

> 1. You bootstrap a Virtual Machine (VM) in your VPC. This VM spins up the agent

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. You bootstrap a virtual machine (VM) in your VPC. This VM spins up the agent
```

   and the required infrastructure.
2. The agent communicates with the control plane to pull the cluster specifications.

When provisioning BYOC, at the time an agent is deployed, Redpanda assigns the

> necessary IAM policies required to run the agent. For details, refer to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
necessary IAM policies required to run the agent. For details, refer to
```
```suggestion
necessary IAM policies required to run the agent. For details, see
```

> [IAM Policies](../security/cloud-security-architecture/authorization/cloud-authorization#aws-iam-policies).

Reviewer 4: This link to AWS IAM Policies isn't working right. Also, I suggest moving the links to in this section from the text above (e.g., creating clusters) into a new Next steps section at the bottom of the section.

---
title: Redpanda Cloud Overview
---

<head>
    <meta name="title" content="Redpanda Cloud Overview | Redpanda Docs"/>
    <meta name="description" content="Redpanda Cloud employs a control plane
    and data plane architecture that ensures no human has direct access to Redpanda
    brokers or customer data."/>

> </head>

Reviewer 4: page missing `link rel="canonical"`

Redpanda supports [Dedicated Cloud](../cloud-overview#dedicated-cloud), with
clusters running in Redpanda Cloud, and also [Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC)](../cloud-overview#byoc),
with clusters running in your private cloud using either in AWS or GCP. Redpanda
Cloud continuously monitors and maintains your Redpanda clusters along with the
underlying Redpanda Cloud infrastructure to meet strict performance, availability,
reliability, and security requirements. These clusters are also deployed with an
integrated and dedicated Redpanda Console and, optionally, with a fully managed
Kafka Connect and connectors cluster.

> ## Cloud Architecture

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Cloud architecture
```

Redpanda Cloud uses a control plane and data plane architecture. The control

> plane configures and maintains Redpanda Cloud clusters agents, which are

Reviewer 4: I think this should be Redpanda Cloud cluster (singular) agents

and maintenance takes place. While Redpanda Cloud clusters are configured and
maintained in the control plane, they are self-contained and remain available
even if the network connection to the control plane is lost.

### Data plane

The data plane is where your Redpanda cluster resides in Redpanda Cloud; it is
self-contained and managed by an agent that receives cluster specifications from the
control plane. Redpanda Cloud clusters are interchangeably referred to as
data planes. All network connections into the data plane take place through
either a public endpoint or a Redpanda Cloud [VPC peering network connection](../vpc-peering).

### Agent

The Redpanda Cloud agent, also known as the data plane agent, provisions,
configures, and maintains all the resources in the Redpanda Cloud cluster, from
the network all the way up to the Redpanda cluster and connectors infrastructure.
Data plane resources include cloud infrastructure, Kubernetes, and data plane software
artifacts.

Agents can be bootstrapped in two different ways: automatically by a machine
or manually by a human. The human-driven agent bootstrap is designed for

> the Redpanda Cloud BYOC deployment type. After the agent is up and running,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
BYOC deployments. After the agent is up and running,
```

it connects to the control plane and starts dequeuing and applying cluster
specifications that provision, configure, and maintain Redpanda Cloud clusters.

The agent is in constant communication with the Redpanda Cloud control plane,
receiving and applying cluster specifications and exchanging cluster metadata.
Agents are authenticated and authorized through opaque and ephemeral tokens, and
have dedicated job queues in the control plane. In BYOC, you can provision,
configure, and maintain agents using `rpk`.

> Redpanda Cloud agents also manage Redpanda Cloud VPC peering networks. However,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Redpanda Cloud agents also manage VPC peering networks. However,
```

only one agent manages each network resource at a time.

The following diagram identifies the resources, operations, and connections
that exist in and between the Redpanda Cloud control plane and data plane.

![Redpanda Cloud Security Architecture](../../../../static/img/control-plane.png)

## Ways to provision clusters

Redpanda offers two ways to provision clusters in the cloud:
* Dedicated Cloud
* Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC): AWS or GCP

Both methods offer the following features:
* Single-zone or multi-zone availability
    * A single-zone cluster is deployed in one availability zone. If that
      availability zone fails, the cluster becomes unavailable.

>     * A multi-zone cluster is deployed across three availability zones, which
>       provides higher resiliency in the event of a failure in one of the zones.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * A multi-zone cluster is deployed across three availability zones. This
      provides higher resiliency in the event of a failure in one of the zones.
```
just to make it parallel with bullet above

control plane. The Redpanda cluster is created in Redpanda’s VPC, and the
endpoints are exposed so you can produce or consume events.

### BYOC

With BYOC, you deploy Redpanda in your own VPC, so that all data is
contained in your own environment. There are no inbound connections from the
control plane to the data plane. This provides an additional layer of security
and isolation.

Redpanda handles provisioning, monitoring, and upgrades. You can choose AWS or
GCP as your cloud provider.

Setting up a BYOC cluster is initiated from the Redpanda control plane. This is
a two-step process performed using `rpk`:
1. You bootstrap a virtual machine (VM) in your VPC. This VM spins up the agent
   and the required infrastructure.
2. The agent communicates with the control plane to pull the cluster specifications.

When provisioning BYOC, at the time an agent is deployed, Redpanda assigns the
necessary IAM policies required to run the agent.

### Next steps

- [Create a Dedicated Cloud Cluster on AWS](../create-dedicated-cloud-cluster-aws)
- [Create a BYOC Cluster on AWS](../create-byoc-cluster-aws)
- [Create a BYOC Cluster on GCP](../create-byoc-cluster-gcp)

> - [Use Managed Connectors to integrate your Redpanda data with different data systems](../managed-connectors)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Use managed connectors to integrate your Redpanda data with different data systems](../managed-connectors)
```

Author: In this case, I'm trying to match the case of the heading/navtree...

only one agent manages each network resource at a time.

The following diagram identifies the resources, operations, and connections
that exist in and between the Redpanda Cloud control plane and data plane.

![Redpanda Cloud Security Architecture](../../../../static/img/control-plane.png)

## Ways to provision clusters

Redpanda offers two ways to provision clusters in the cloud:
* Dedicated Cloud
* Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC): AWS or GCP

Both methods offer the following features:
* Single-zone or multi-zone availability
    * A single-zone cluster is deployed in one availability zone. If that
      availability zone fails, the cluster becomes unavailable.
    * A multi-zone cluster is deployed across three availability zones, which
      provides higher resiliency in the event of a failure in one of the zones.
* Private networking using VPC peering
* Ability to export metrics to a 3rd-party monitoring system
* Managed connectors
* Unlimited retention with Tiered Storage

### Dedicated Cloud

With Dedicated Cloud, you host your data in Redpanda’s Virtual Private Cloud
(VPC), and Redpanda handles provisioning, operations, and maintenance. Redpanda

> also performs automatic backups to S3 (for AWS) or GCS (for GCP).

Reviewer 3: We don’t support backups, yet. We use S3 and GCS for tiered storage but I wouldn’t called that a backup perse.
